---
title: On Transforms and planes
tags: Transformation Affine Inverse Plane Normal Matrix
---

### If we want to transform a line or plane using an affine transformation...

Given a transformation matrix in let's say, two dimensions:

$$
\begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix} x \\ y \end{bmatrix} =
\begin{bmatrix} x' \\ y' \end{bmatrix}
$$

We notice that the origin $$\begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix}$$ always transforms to itself. That is to say
that a standard transformation matrix cannot encode a translation without help. We can add a translation term to
make this happen:

$$
\begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ c & d \end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix} x \\ y \end{bmatrix} +
\begin{bmatrix} e \\ f \end{bmatrix} =
\begin{bmatrix} x' \\ y' \end{bmatrix}
$$

Which is essentially equivalent to:

$$
\begin{bmatrix} a & b & e \\ c & d & f \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix} x \\ y \\ 1 \end{bmatrix} =
\begin{bmatrix} x' \\ y' \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}
$$

Which we will write from now on as:

$$
Tv = v'
$$

This is the basis of the affine transform. Adding that extra $$1$$ to the end of our coordinates makes them
*homogenous coordinates*. For most intents and
purposes, we can ignore it.

The general equation of a line in two dimensions is given by a set of points $$\begin{bmatrix} x \\ y
\end{bmatrix} $$ satisfying the equation $$ ax + by + c = 0 $$. This is usually better than it's simpler cousin $$ y
= mx + c $$, because that structure has trouble representing vertical lines. This formula can be written as:

$$
\begin{bmatrix} a & b & c \end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix} x \\ y \\ 1 \end{bmatrix} = 0
$$

or simply

$$
nv = 0
$$

where $$ \begin{bmatrix} a & b \end{bmatrix} $$ happens to be a vector perpendicular to the line. In order to
transform a line using an affine transform matrix so that $$nv = 0 \rightarrow n'v' = 0$$ where $$v' = Tv $$, the
transformed points must satisfy the following equation:

$$
nv = 0 \\
n(T^{-1}v') = 0 \\
(nT^{-1})v' = 0
$$

Which implies that $$n' = nT^{-1} $$. If we consider that $$n$$ is a normal for a line in 2d space, or plane in 3d
space, we can use it to transform a plane using an affine transform and back again. This is useful when trying to
render scenes using raytracing and constructive solid geometry.

{% include math.html %}
